
Text extracted from the Preamble section of each knowledge area as presented in the ACM curriculum
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 

Artificial intelligence (AI) studies problems that are difficult or impractical to solve with traditional algorithmic approaches. These problems are often reminiscent of those considered to require human intelligence, and the resulting AI solution strategies typically generalize over classes of problems. AI techniques are now pervasive in computing, supporting everyday applications such as email, social media, photography, financial markets, and intelligent virtual assistants (e.g., Siri, Alexa). These techniques are also used in the design and analysis of autonomous agents that perceive their environment and interact rationally with it, such as self-driving vehicles and other robots. 
Traditionally, AI has included a mix of symbolic and subsymbolic approaches. The solutions it provides rely on a broad set of general and specialized knowledge representation schemes, problem solving mechanisms, and optimization techniques. These approaches deal with perception (e.g., speech recognition, natural language understanding, computer vision), problem solving (e.g., search, planning, optimization), generation (e.g., narrative, conversation, images, models, recommendations), acting (e.g., robotics, task-automation, control), and the architectures needed to support them (e.g., single agents, multi-agent systems). Machine learning may be used within each of these aspects and can even be employed end-to-end across all of them. The study of Artificial Intelligence prepares students to determine when an AI approach is appropriate for a given problem, identify appropriate representations and reasoning mechanisms, implement them, and evaluate them with respect to both performance and their broader societal impact. 
Over the past decade, the term “artificial intelligence” has become commonplace within businesses, news articles, and everyday conversation, driven largely by a series of high-impact machine learning applications. These advances were made possible by the widespread availability of large datasets, increased computational power, and algorithmic improvements. In particular, there has been a shift from engineered representations to representations learned automatically through optimization over large datasets. The resulting advances have put such terms as “neural networks” and “deep learning” into everyday vernacular. Businesses now advertise AI-based solutions as value-additions to their services, so that “artificial intelligence” is now both a technical term and a marketing buzzword. Other disciplines, such as biology, art, architecture, and finance, increasingly use AI techniques to solve problems within their disciplines. 
For the first time in our history, the broader population has access to sophisticated AI-driven tools, including tools to generate essays or poems from a prompt, artwork from a description, and fake photographs or videos depicting real people. AI technology is now in widespread use in stock trading, curating our news and social media feeds, automated evaluation of job applicants, detection of medical conditions, and influencing prison sentencing through recidivism prediction. Consequently, AI technology can have significant societal impacts and ethical considerations that must be understood and considered when developing and applying it.

Algorithmic Foundations (AL) 

Algorithms and data structures are fundamental to computer science, since every theoretical computation and applied program consists of algorithms that operate on data elements possessing some underlying structure. Selecting appropriate computational solutions to real-world problems benefits from understanding the theoretical and practical capabilities and limitations of available algorithms and paradigms, including their impact on the environment and society. Moreover, this understanding provides insight into the intrinsic nature of computation, computational problems, and computational problem-solving as well as possible solution techniques independent of programming language, programming paradigm, computer hardware, or other implementation aspects. 
This knowledge area focuses on the nature of computation including the concepts and skills required to design and analyze algorithms for solving real-world computational problems. It complements the implementation of algorithms and data structures found in the Software Development Foundations (SDF) knowledge area. As algorithms and data structures are essential in all advanced areas of computer science, this area provides the algorithmic foundations that every computer science graduate is expected to know. Exposure to the breadth of these foundational AL topics is designed to provide students with the basis for studying these topics in more depth, for studying additional computation and algorithm topics, and for learning advanced algorithms across a variety of CS knowledge areas and CS+X disciplines.
Architecture and Organization (AR) 

Computing professionals spend considerable time writing efficient code to solve a particular problem in an application domain. As the shift from sequential to parallel processing occurs, a deeper understanding of the underlying computer architectures is necessary. Architecture can no longer be viewed as a black box where principles from one architecture can be applied to another. Instead, programmers should look inside the black box and use specific components to enhance system performance and energy efficiency. 
The Architecture and Organization (AR) knowledge area aims to develop a deeper understanding of the hardware environments upon which almost all computing is based, and the relevant interfaces provided to higher software layers. The target hardware comprises low-end embedded system processors up to high-end enterprise multiprocessors. 
The topics in this knowledge area will benefit students by enabling them to appreciate the fundamental architectural principles of modern computer systems, including the challenge of harnessing parallelism to sustain performance and energy improvements into the future. This KA will help computer science students depart from the black box approach and become more aware of the underlying computer system and the efficiencies specific architectures can achieve.
Data Management (DM) 

Since the mid-1970s, the study of Data Management (DM) has meant an almost exclusive study of relational database systems. Depending on institutional context, students have studied, in varying proportions, the following. 
Data modeling and database design: for example, E-R Data model, relational model, normalization theory 
Query construction: e.g., relational algebra, SQL 
Query processing: e.g., indices (B+tree, hash), algorithms (e.g., external sorting, select, project, join), query optimization (transformations, index selection) 
DBMS internals: e.g., concurrency/locking, transaction management, buffer management 
Today's graduates are expected to possess DBMS user (rather than implementor) skills. These primarily include data modeling and query construction; ability to take an unorganized collection of data, organize it using a DBMS, and access/update the collection via queries. 
Additionally, students need to study the following.
The role data plays in an organization. This includes the Data Life Cycle: Creation-Processing Review/Reporting-Retention/Retrieval-Destruction.
The social/legal aspects of data collection: e.g., scale, data privacy, database privacy (compliance) by design, de-identification, ownership, reliability, database security, and intended and unintended applications. 
Emerging and advanced technologies that are augmenting/replacing traditional relational systems, particularly those used to support (big) data analytics, including NoSQL (e.g., JSON, XML, key value store databases), cloud databases, MapReduce, and dataframes. 
The existing and emerging roles for those involved with data management, which include the following. 
Product feature engineers: those who use both SQL and NoSQL operational databases. 
Analytical engineers/data engineers: those who write analytical SQL, Python, and Scala code to build data assets for business groups. 
Business analysts: those who build/manage data most frequently with Excel spreadsheets. 
Data infrastructure engineers: those who implement a data management system in a variety of data applications (e.g., OLTP). 
“Everyone” who produces or consumes data must understand the associated social, ethical, and professional issues. 
One role that transcends all the above categories is that of data custodian. Previously, data were seen as a resource to be managed (Information Systems Management) just like other enterprise resources. Today, data are seen in a larger context. Data about customers can now be seen as belonging to (or in some national contexts, as owned by) those customers. There is now an accepted understanding that the safe and ethical storage, and use, of institutional data is part of being a responsible data custodian.
Furthermore, we acknowledge the tension between a curricular focus on professional preparation versus the study of a knowledge area as a scientific endeavor. This is particularly true with Data Management. For example, proving (or at least knowing) the completeness of Armstrong’s Axioms is fundamental in functional dependency theory. However, most computer science graduates will never utilize this concept during their professional careers. The same can be said for many other topics in the Data Management canon. Conversely, if our graduates can only normalize data into Boyce-Codd normal form (using an automated tool) and write SQL queries, without understanding the role that indices play in efficient query execution, we have done them and society a disservice. 
To this end, the number of CS Core hours is relatively small relative to the KA Core hours. This approach is designed to allow institutions with differing contexts to customize their curricula appropriately. An institution that focuses on OLTP implementation, for example, would prioritize efficient storage and data access, while an institution that focuses on product features would prioritize programmatic access to extant databases. 
However, an institution manages this tension, we wish to give voice to one of the ironies of computer science curricula. Students typically spend much of their educational life reading (and writing) data from a file or interactively, while outside of the academy the predominant data comes from databases accessed programmatically. Perhaps in the not-too-distant future students will learn programmatic database access early on and then continue this practice as they progress through their curriculum. 
Finally, we understand that while the Data Management KA may be orthogonal to the SEC (Security) and SEP (Society, Ethics, and the Profession) KAs, it is also ground zero for these (and other) knowledge areas. When designing persistent data stores, the question of what should be stored must be examined from both legal and ethical perspectives. Are there privacy concerns? And just as importantly, how well protected is the data?
Foundations of Programming Languages (FPL) 

The foundations of programming languages are rooted in discrete mathematics, logic, and formal languages, and provide a basis for the understanding of complex modern programming languages. Although programming languages vary according to the language paradigm and the problem domain and evolve in response to both societal needs and technological advancement, they share an underlying abstract model of computation and program development. This remains true even as processor hardware and their interface with programming tools become increasingly intertwined and progressively more complex. An understanding of the common abstractions and programming paradigms enables faster learning of programming languages. 
The Foundations of Programming Languages knowledge area is concerned with articulating the underlying concepts and principles of programming languages, the formal specification of a programming language and the behavior of a program, explaining how programming languages are implemented, comparing the strengths and weaknesses of various programming paradigms, and describing how programming languages interface with entities such as operating systems and hardware. The concepts covered here are applicable to several languages and an understanding of these principles assists a learner to move readily from one language to another, as well as select a programming paradigm and language that best suits the problem at hand. 
Programming languages are the medium through which programmers precisely describe concepts, formulate algorithms, and reason about solutions. Over the course of a career, a computer scientist will learn and work with many different languages, separately or together. Software developers must understand different programming models, programming features and constructs, and underlying concepts to make informed design choices among languages that support multiple complementary approaches. It would be useful to know how programming language features are defined, composed, and implemented to improve execution efficiency and long-term maintenance of developed software. Also useful is a basic knowledge of language translation, program analysis, run-time behavior, memory management and interplay of concurrent processes communicating with each other through message passing, shared memory, and synchronization. Finally, some developers and researchers will need to design new languages, an exercise which requires greater familiarity with basic principles.
Graphics and Interactive Techniques (GIT) 

Computer graphics is the term used to describe the computer generation and manipulation of images and can be viewed as the science of enabling visual communication through computation. Its application domains include animation, Computer Generated Imagery (CGI) and Visual Effects (VFX); engineering; machine learning; medical imaging; scientific, information, and knowledge visualization; simulators; special effects; user interfaces; and video games. Traditionally, graphics at the undergraduate level focused on rendering, linear algebra, physics, the graphics pipeline, interaction, and phenomenological approaches. Today’s graphics courses increasingly include data science, physical computing, animation, and haptics. Thus, the knowledge area (KA) expanded beyond core image-based computer graphics. At the advanced level, undergraduate institutions are more likely to offer one or several courses specializing in a specific graphics knowledge unit (KU) or topic: e.g., gaming, animation, visualization, tangible or physical computing, and immersive courses such as Augmented Reality (AR)/Virtual Reality (VR)/eXtended Reality (XR). There is considerable connection with other computer science knowledge areas (KAs): Algorithmic Foundations, Architecture and Organization, Artificial Intelligence; Human-Computer Interaction; Parallel and Distributed Computing; Specialized Platform Development; Software Engineering; and Society, Ethics, and the Profession. 
For students to become adept at the use and generation of computer graphics and interactive techniques, many issues must be addressed, such as human perception and cognition, data and image file formats, display specifications and protocols, hardware interfaces, and application program interfaces (APIs). Unlike other knowledge areas, knowledge units within Graphics and Interactive Techniques may be included in a variety of elective courses. Alternatively, graphics topics may be introduced in an applied project in courses primarily covering human computer interaction, embedded systems, web development, introductory programming courses, etc. Undergraduate computer science students who stu dy the knowledge units specified below through a balance of theory and applied instruction will be able to understand, evaluate, and/or implement the related graphics and interactive techniques as users and developers. Because technology changes rapidly, the Graphics and Interactive Techniques subcommittee attempted to avoid being overly prescriptive. Any examples of APIs, programs, and languages should be considered as appropriate examples in 2023. In effect, this is a snapshot in time. 
Graphics as a knowledge area has expanded and become pervasive since the CS2013 report. AR/VR/XR, artificial intelligence, computer vision, data science, machine learning, and interfaces driven by embedded sensors in everything from cars to coffee makers use graphics and interactive techniques. The now ubiquitous smartphone has made much of the world’s population regular users and creators of graphics, digital images, and the interactive techniques to manipulate them. Animations, games, visualizations, and immersive applications that ran on desktops in 2013, now can run on mobile devices. The amount of stored digital data grew exponentially since 2013, and both data and visualizations are now published by myriad sources including news media and scientific organizations. Revenue from mobile video games now exceeds that of music and movies combined [1]. CGI and VFX are employed in almost all films, animations, TV productions, advertising, and business graphics. The 151 number of people who create graphics has skyrocketed, as have the number of applications and generative tools used to produce graphics. 
It is critical that students and faculty confront the ethical issues, questions, and conundrums that have arisen and will continue to arise in and because of applications in computer graphics. Today’s headlines unfortunately already provide examples of inequity and/or wrong-doing in autonomous navigation, deepfakes, computational photography, generative images, and facial recognition.
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) 

Computational systems not only enable users to solve problems, but also foster social connectedness and support a broad variety of human endeavors. Thus, these systems should work well with their users and solve problems in ways that respect individual dignity, social justice, and human values and creativity. Human-computer interaction (HCI) addresses those issues from an interdisciplinary perspective that includes computer science, psychology, business strategy, and design principles. 
Each user is different and, from the perspective of HCI, the design of every system that interacts with people should anticipate and respect that diversity. This includes not only accessibility, but also cultural and societal norms, neural diversity, modality, and the responses the system elicits in its users. An effective computational system should evoke trust while it treats its users fairly, respects their privacy, provides security, and abides by ethical principles. 
These goals require design-centric engineering that begins with intention and with the understanding that design is an iterative process, one that requires repeated evaluation of its usability and its impact on its users. Moreover, technology evokes user responses, not only by its output, but also by the modalities with which it senses and communicates. This knowledge area heightens the awareness of these issues and should influence every computer scientist.
Mathematical and Statistical Foundations (MSF) 

A strong mathematical foundation remains a bedrock of computer science education and infuses the practice of computing whether in developing algorithms, designing systems, modeling real-world phenomena, or computing with data. This Mathematical and Statistical Foundations (MSF) knowledge area – the successor to the ACM CS2013 [1] curriculum's "Discrete Structures" area – seeks to identify the mathematical and statistical material that undergirds modern computer science. The change of name corresponds to a realization both that the broader name better describes the combination of topics from the 2013 report and from those required for the recently growing areas of computer science, such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, data science, and quantum computing, many of which have continuous mathematics as their foundations.
Networking and Communication (NC) 

Networking and communication play a central role in interconnected computer systems that are transforming the daily lives of billions of people. The public internet provides connectivity for networked applications that serve ever-increasing numbers of individuals and organizations around the world. Complementing the public sector, major proprietary networks leverage their global footprints to support cost-effective distributed computing, storage, and content delivery. Advances in satellite networks expand connectivity to rural areas. Device-to-device communication underlies the emerging Internet of Things. 
This knowledge area deals with key concepts in networking and communication, as well as their representative instantiations in the internet and other computer networks. Besides the basic principles of switching and layering, the area at its core provides knowledge on naming, addressing, reliability, error control, flow control, congestion control, domain hierarchy, routing, forwarding, modulation, encoding, framing, and access control. The area also covers knowledge units in network security and mobility, such as security threats, countermeasures, device-to-device communication, and multi-hop wireless networking. In addition to the fundamental principles, the area includes their specific realization of the Internet as well as hands-on skills in the implementation of networking and communication concepts. Finally, the area comprises emerging topics such as network virtualization and quantum networking. 
As the main learning outcome, learners develop a thorough understanding of the role and operation of networking and communication in networked computer systems. They learn how network structure and communication protocols affect the behavior of distributed applications. The area can be used to educate not only key principles but also their specific instantiations in the internet and equip the student with hands-on implementation skills. While computer-system, networking, and communication technologies are advancing at a fast pace, the gained fundamental knowledge enables the student to readily apply the concepts in new technological settings.
Operating systems (OS) 

The operating system is a collection of services needed to safely interface the hardware with applications. Core topics focus on the mechanisms and policies needed to virtualize computation, memory, and Input/Output (I/O). Overarching themes that are reused at many levels in computer systems are well illustrated in operating systems (e.g., polling vs interrupts, caching, flexibility vs costs, scheduling approaches to processes, page replacement, etc.). The Operating Systems knowledge area contains the key underlying concepts for other knowledge areas — trust boundaries, concurrency, persistence, and safe extensibility.
Parallel and Distributed Computing (PDC) 

Parallel and distributed programming arranges, coordinates, and controls multiple computations occurring at the same time across different places. The ubiquity of parallelism and distribution are inevitable consequences of increasing numbers of gates in processors, processors in computers, and computers everywhere that may be used to improve performance compared to sequential programs, while also coping with the intrinsic interconnectedness of the world, and the possibility that some components or connections fail or behave maliciously. Parallel and distributed programming removes the restrictions of sequential programming that require computational steps to occur in a serial order in a single place, revealing further distinctions, techniques, and analyses applying at each layer of computing systems. 
In most conventional usage, “parallel” programming focuses on establishing and coordinating multiple activities that may occur at the same time, “distributed” programming focuses on establishing and coordinating activities that may occur in different places, and “concurrent” programming focuses on interactions of ongoing activities with each other and the environment. However, all three terms may apply in most contexts. Parallelism generally implies some form of distribution because multiple activities occurring without sequential ordering constraints happen in multiple physical places (unless they rely on context-switching or quantum effects). Conversely, actions in different places need not bear any specific sequential ordering with respect to each other in the absence of communication constraints. 
Parallel, distributed, and concurrent programming techniques form the core of High Performance Computing (HPC), distributed systems, and increasingly, nearly every computing application. The PDC knowledge area has evolved from a diverse set of advanced topics into a central body of knowledge and practice, permeating almost every other aspect of computing. Growth of the field has occurred irregularly across different subfields of computing, sometimes with different goals, terminology, and practices, masking the considerable overlap of basic ideas and skills that are the primary focus of this knowledge area. Nearly every problem with a sequential solution also admits parallel and/or distributed solutions; additional problems and solutions arise only in the context of concurrency. Nearly every application domain of parallel and distributed computing is a well-developed area of study and/or engineering too large to enumerate.
Software Development Foundamentals (SDF) 

Fluency in the process of software development is fundamental to the study of computer science. To use computers to solve problems most effectively, students must be competent at reading and writing programs. Beyond programming skills, however, they must be able to select and use appropriate data structures and algorithms and use modern development and testing tools. 
The SDF knowledge area brings together fundamental concepts and skills related to software development, focusing on concepts and skills that should be taught early in a computer science program, typically in the first year. This includes fundamental programming concepts and their effective use in writing programs, use of fundamental data structures which may be provided by the programming language, basics of programming practices for writing good quality programs, reading, and understanding programs, and some understanding of the impact of algorithms on the performance of the programs. The 43 hours of material in this knowledge area may be augmented with core material from other knowledge areas as students progress to mid- and upper-level courses. 
This knowledge area assumes a contemporary programming language with built-in support for common data types including associative data types like dictionaries/maps as the vehicle for introducing students to programming (e.g., Python, Java). However, this is not to discourage the use of older or lower-level languages for SDF — the knowledge units below can be suitably adapted for the actual language used. 
The emergence of generative AI and Large Language Models (LLMs), which can generate programs for many programming tasks, will undoubtedly affect the programming profession and consequently the teaching of many CS topics. However, to be able to effectively use generative AI in programming tasks, a programmer must have a good understanding of programs, and hence must still learn the foundations of programming and develop basic programming skills - which is the aim of SDF. Consequently, we feel that the desired outcomes for SDF should remain the same, though different instructors may now give more emphasis to program understanding, documenting, specifications, analysis, and testing. (This is like teaching students multiplication, addition, etc. even though calculators can be used to do them).
Software Engineering (SE) 

As far back as the early 1970s, British computer scientist Brian Randell allegedly said, “Software engineering is the multi-person construction of multi-version programs.” This is an essential insight: while programming is the skill that governs our ability to write a program, software engineering is distinct in two dimensions: time and people. 
First, a software engineering project is a team endeavor; being a solitary programming expert is insufficient. Skilled software engineers must demonstrate expertise in communication and collaboration. Programming may be an individual activity, but software engineering is a collaborative one, deeply tied to issues of professionalism, teamwork, and communication. 
Second, a software engineering project is usually “multi-version.” It has an expected lifespan; it needs to function properly for months, years, or decades. Features may be added or removed to meet product requirements. The engineering team itself will likely change. The technological context will shift, as our computing platforms evolve, programming languages change, dependencies upgrade, etc. This exposure to matters of time and change is novel when compared to a programming project: it isn’t enough to build a thing that works, instead it must work and stay working. Many of the most challenging topics in tech share “time will lead to change” as a root cause: backward compatibility, version skew, dependency management, schema changes, protocol evolution. 
Software engineering presents a particularly difficult challenge for learning in an academic setting. Given that the major differences between programming and software engineering are time and teamwork, it is hard to generate lessons that require successful teamwork and that faithfully present the challenges of time. Additionally, some topics in software engineering will be more authentic and more relevant if our learners experience collaborative and long-term software engineering projects in vivo rather than in the classroom. Regardless of whether that happens as an internship, involvement in an open-source project, or full-time engineering role, a month of full-time hands-on experience has more available hours than the average software engineering course. 
Thus, a software engineering curriculum must focus on concepts needed by most new-graduate hires, and that either are novel for those who are trained primarily as programmers, or that are abstract concepts that may not get explicitly stated/shared on the job. Such topics include, but are not limited to: 
Testing 
Teamwork, collaboration 
Communication 
Design 
Maintenance and evolution 
Software engineering tools 
Some such material is reasonably suited to a standard lecture or lecture + lab course. Discussing theoretical underpinnings of version control systems, or branching strategies in such systems, can be an effective way to familiarize students with those ideas. Similarly, a theoretical discussion can highlight 237 the difference between static and dynamic analysis tools or may motivate discussion of diamond dependency problems in dependency networks. 
On the other hand, many of the fundamental topics of software engineering are best experienced in a hands-on fashion. Historically, project-oriented courses have been a common vehicle for such learning. We believe that such experience is valuable but also bears some interesting risks: students may form erroneous notions about the difficulty/complexity of collaboration if their only exposure is a single project with teams formed of other novice software engineers. It falls to instructors to decide on the right balance between theoretical material and hands-on projects – neither is a perfect vehicle for this challenging material. We strongly encourage instructors of project courses to aim for iteration and fast feedback – a few simple tasks repeated, as in an Agile-structured project, is better than singular high friction introductions to many types of tasks. Projects with real-world industry partners and clients are also especially encouraged. If long-running project courses are not an option, anything that can expose learners to the collaborative and long-term aspects of software engineering is valuable – adding features to an existing codebase, collaborating on distinct parts of a larger whole, pairing up to write an encoder and decoder, etc. 
All evidence suggests that the role of software in our society will continue to grow for the foreseeable future. Additionally, the era of “two programmers in a garage” seems to have drawn to a close. Most important software these days is a team effort, building on existing code and leveraging existing functionality. The study of software engineering skills is a deeply important counterpoint to the everyday experience of computing students – we must impress on them the reality that few software projects are managed by writing from scratch as a solo endeavor. Communication, teamwork, planning, testing, and tooling are far more important as our students move on from the classroom and make their mark on the wider world. 
Although most CS graduates will go on to an industry position that requires this material, the CS Core topics presented here are of value regardless of whether graduates go on to industry or academia.
Security (SEC) 

Computing supports nearly every facet of modern critical infrastructure: transportation, communication, healthcare, education, energy generation and distribution, to name a few. With rampant attacks on and breaches of this infrastructure, computer science graduates have an important role in designing, implementing, and operating software systems that are robust, safe, and secure. 
The Security (SEC) knowledge area focuses on developing a security mindset into the overall ethos of computer science graduates so that security is embedded in all their work products. Computer science students need to learn about system vulnerabilities and understand threats against computer systems. The Security title choice was intentional to serve as a one-word umbrella term for this knowledge area, which also includes concepts to support privacy, cryptography, secure systems, secure data, and secure code. 
The SEC knowledge area relies on shared concepts pervasive in all the other areas of CS2023. It identifies seven crosscutting concepts of cybersecurity: confidentiality, integrity, availability, risk assessment, systems thinking, adversarial thinking, and human-centered thinking. The seventh concept, human-centered thinking, is additional to the six crosscutting concepts originally defined in the Cybersecurity Curricula 2017 (CSEC2017) [1]. This addition reinforces to students that humans are also a link in the overall chain of security, a theme that is also covered in knowledge areas such as HCI. Principles of protecting systems (also in the DM, OS, SDF, SE and SF knowledge areas) include security-by-design, privacy-by-design, defense-in-depth, and zero-trust. 
Another concept is the notion of assurance, which is an attestation that security mechanisms need to comply with the security policies that have been defined for data, processes, and systems. Assurance is tied in with the concepts of verification and validation in the SE knowledge area. Considerations of data privacy and security are shared with the DM (technical aspects) and SEP knowledge areas. 
The SEC knowledge area thus sits atop several of the other CS2023 knowledge areas, while including additional concepts that are not present in those knowledge areas. The specific dependence on other knowledge areas is stated below, starting with the Core Hours table. CS2023 treats security as a crucial component of the skillset of any CS graduate, and the hours needed for security preparation come from all the other 16 CS2023 knowledge areas.
Society Ethics and Profession (SEP) 

The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct states: “Computing professionals' actions change the world. To act responsibly, they should reflect upon the wider impacts of their work, consistently supporting the public good.” The IEEE Code of Ethics starts by recognizing “the importance of our technologies in affecting the quality of life throughout the world.” The AAAI Code of Professional Ethics and Conduct begins with “Computing professionals, and in particular, AI professionals’ actions change the world. To act responsibly, they should reflect upon the wider impacts of their work, consistently supporting the public good.” 
While technical issues dominate the computing curriculum, they do not constitute a complete educational program in the broader context. It is more evident today than ever that students must also be exposed to the larger societal context of computing to develop an understanding of the critical and relevant social, ethical, legal, and professional issues and responsibilities at hand. This need to incorporate the study of these non-technical issues into the ACM curriculum was formally recognized in 1991, as articulated in the following excerpt from CS1991 [1]. 
Undergraduates also need to understand the basic cultural, social, legal, and ethical issues inherent in the discipline of computing. They should understand where the discipline has been, where it is, and where it is heading. They should also understand their individual roles in this process, as well as appreciate the philosophical questions, technical problems, and aesthetic values that play an important part in the development of the discipline. 
Students also need to develop the ability to ask serious questions about the social impact of computing and to evaluate proposed answers to those questions. Future practitioners must be able to anticipate the impact of introducing a given product into a given environment. Will that product enhance or degrade the quality of life? What will the impact be upon individuals, groups, and institutions? 
Finally, students need to be aware of the basic legal rights of software and hardware vendors and users, and they also need to appreciate the ethical values that are the basis for those rights. Future practitioners must understand the responsibility that they will bear, and the possible consequences of failure. They must understand their own limitations as well as the limitations of their tools. All practitioners must make a long-term commitment to remaining current in their chosen specialties and in the discipline of computing as a whole. 
Nonetheless, in recent years myriad high-profile issues affecting society at large have occurred leading to the conclusion that computer science professionals are not as prepared as they should be. 
As technological advances (more specifically, how these advances are used by humans) continue to significantly impact the way we live and work, the critical importance of social and ethical issues and professional practice continues to increase in magnitude and consequence. The ways we use 269 computing products and platforms, while hopefully providing opportunities, also introduce ever more challenging problems. A recent example is the emergence of generative AI, including large language models that generate code. A 2020 Communications of the ACM article [4] stated: “... because computing as a discipline is becoming progressively more entangled within the human and social lifeworld, computing as an academic discipline must move away from engineering-inspired curricular models and integrate the analytic lenses supplied by social science theories and methodologies.” 
In parallel to, and as part of, the heightened awareness of the social consequences computing has on the world, computing communities have become much more aware – and active – in areas of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility. These feature in statements and initiatives at ACM [8], IEEE [9], and AAAI [10] and in their codes of conduct [1-3]. All students deserve an inclusive, diverse, equitable and accessible learning environment. Computing students also have a unique duty to ensure that when put to practice, their skills, knowledge, and competencies are applied in ways that work for, and not against, the principles of diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility. These principles are inherently a part of computing, and a new knowledge unit “Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility” (SEP-DEIA) has been added to this knowledge area. 
Computer science educators may opt to deliver the material in this knowledge area within the contexts of traditional technical and theoretical courses, in dedicated courses, and as part of capstone, project, and professional practice courses. The material in this knowledge area is best covered through a combination of all the above. It is too commonly held that many topics in this knowledge area may not readily lend themselves to being covered in other more traditional computer science courses. However, many of these topics naturally arise in traditional courses, or can be included with minimal effort. The benefits of exposing students to SEP topics within the context of those traditional courses are invaluable. Nonetheless institutional challenges will present barriers; for instance, some of these traditional courses may not be offered at a given institution and, in such cases, it is difficult to cover these topics appropriately without a dedicated SEP course. If social, ethical, and professional considerations are covered only in a dedicated course and not in the context of others, it could reinforce the false notion that technical processes are void of these important aspects, or that they are more isolated than they are. Because of the broad relevance of these knowledge units, it is important that as many traditional courses as possible include aspects such as case studies, that analyze ethical, legal, social, and professional considerations in the context of the technical subject matter of those courses. Courses in areas such as software engineering, databases, computer graphics, computer networks, information assurance & security, and introduction to computing, all provide obvious context for analysis of such issues. However, an ethics-related module could be developed for almost any program. It would be explicitly against the spirit of these recommendations to have only a dedicated course within a specific computer science curriculum without great practical reason. Further, these topics should be covered in courses starting from year 1. Presenting them as advanced topics in later courses only creates an artificial perception that SEP topics are only important at a certain level or complexity. While it is true that the importance and consequence of SEP topics increases with level and complexity, introductory topics are not devoid of SEP topics. Further, many SEP topics are best presented early to lay a foundation for more intricate topics later in the curriculum. 
Running through all the topics in this knowledge area is the need to speak to the computing practitioner’s responsibility to proactively address issues through both ethical and technical actions. Today it is important not only for the topics in this knowledge area, but for students’ knowledge in general, that the ethical issues discussed in any course should be directly related to – and arise naturally from – the subject matter of that course. Examples include a discussion in a database course of the SEP aspects of data aggregation or data mining; or a discussion in a software engineering course of the potential conflicts between obligations to the customer and users as well as all others affected by their work. Computing faculty who are unfamiliar with the content and/or pedagogy of applied ethics are urged to take advantage of the considerable resources from ACM, IEEE-CS, AAAI, SIGCAS (ACM Special Interest Group on Computers and Society), and other organizations. Additionally, it is the educator’s responsibility to impress upon students that this area is just as important – in ways more important – than technical areas. The societal, ethical, and professional knowledge gained in studying topics in this knowledge area will be used throughout one’s career and are transferable between projects, jobs, and often even industries, particularly as one’s career progresses into project leadership and management. 
The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct [5], the IEEE Code of Ethics [6], and the AAAI Code of Professional Ethics and Conduct [7] provide guidance that serve as the basis for the conduct of all computing professionals in their work. The ACM Code emphasizes that ethical reasoning is not an algorithm to be followed, and computer professionals are expected to consider how their work impacts the public good as the primary consideration. It falls to computing educators to highlight the domain specific role of these topics for our students, but computer science programs should certainly be willing to lean on complementary courses from the humanities and social sciences. 
Most computing educators are not also moral philosophers. Yet CS2023, along with past CS curricular recommendations, indicate the need for ethical analysis. CS2023 and prior curricular recommendations are quite clear on the required mathematical foundations that students are expected to gain which are often delivered by mathematics departments. Yet, the same is not true of moral philosophy. No one would expect a student to be able to provide a proof by induction until after having successfully completed a course in discrete mathematics. Yet, the parallel with respect to ethical analyses is somehow absent. We seemingly do (often) expect our students to perform ethical analysis without having the appropriate prerequisite knowledge from philosophy. Further, the application of ethical analysis also underlies every other knowledge unit in this knowledge area. We acknowledge that the knowledge unit Methods for Ethical Analysis (SEP-Ethical-Analysis) is the only one in this knowledge area that does not readily lend itself to being taught in the context of other CS2023 knowledge areas. Suggestions in terms of addressing this appear in the Course Packaging Suggestions. 
The lack of prerequisite training in social, ethical, and professional topics has facilitated graduates operating with a certain ethical egoism (e.g., ‘Here is what I believe/think/feel is right’). Regardless of how well intentioned, one might conclude that this is what brought us to a point in history where there are frequent occurrences of unintended consequences of technology, serious data breaches, and software failures causing economic, emotional. and physical harm. Certainly, computing graduates who have learned how to apply the various ethical frameworks or lenses proposed through the ages would only serve to improve this situation. In retrospect, to ignore the lessons from moral philosophy, which have been debated and refined for millennia – on what it means to act justly, or work for the common good – appears as hubris. 
A computer science student must not graduate without understanding how society and ethics influence the computing profession. Nor should it be possible to complete a computer science degree without learning how computing professionals influence society, the ethical considerations involved in shaping that impact, and the student-turned-graduate’s role in these relationships, as both computing professionals and members of society.
Systems Foundamentals (SF) 
A computer system is a set of hardware and software infrastructures upon which applications are constructed. Computer systems have become a pillar of people's daily life. As such, it is essential for students to learn knowledge about computer systems, grasp the skills to use and design these systems, and understand the fundamental rationale and principles in computer systems. It could equip students with the necessary competence for a career related to computer science. 
In the curriculum of computer science, the study of computer systems typically spans multiple knowledge areas, including, but not limited to, operating systems, parallel and distributed systems, communications networks, computer architecture and organization, and software engineering. The System Fundamentals knowledge area, as suggested by its name, focuses on the fundamental concepts and design principles in computer systems that are shared by these courses within their respective cores. The goal of this knowledge area is to present an integrative view of these fundamental concepts and design principles in a unified albeit simplified fashion, providing a common foundation for the different specialized mechanisms and policies appropriate to the specific domain area. The fundamental concepts in this knowledge area include an overview of computer systems, basic concepts such as state and state transition, resource allocation and scheduling, and so on. Moreover, this knowledge area introduces basic design principles to improve the reliability, availability, efficiency, and security of computer systems.
Specialized Platform Development (SPD)

The Specialized Platform Development (SPD) knowledge area refers to attributes involving the creation of software targeting non-traditional hardware platforms. Developing for each specialized platform, for example, robots, mobile systems, web-based systems, and embedded systems, typically involves unique considerations. 
Societal and industry needs have created a high demand for developers on specialized platforms, such as mobile applications, web platforms, robotic platforms, and embedded systems. Some unique professional abilities relevant to this knowledge area include the following. 
Creating applications that provide a consistent user experience across various devices, screen sizes, and operating systems.
Developing application programming interfaces (APIs) to support the functionality of each specialized platform. 
Managing challenges related to resource constraints such as computation, memory, storage, and networking and communication. 
Applying cross-cutting concerns such as optimization, security, better development practices, etc.